[DPE-10542] add LDAP docs (#87)
canonical/valkey-operator: docs/how-to/ldap.md

> # How to enable LDAP

Reviewer: Question: Interestingly enough, a guide title Enable LDAP contains instruction how to disable it too. Strictly speaking that is not good. Can we rename it to something more accomodating about LDAP? Like How to... set up LDAP, manage LDAP, configure LDAP. Even deploy LDAP would be a bit better.

Author: Good point, I've renamed it to `How to manage LDAP`.

LDAP (Lightweight Directory Access Protocol) enables centralized authentication for Valkey, 
reducing the overhead of managing local credentials. LDAP support in Charmed Valkey also enables
role-based access control.

This guide goes over the steps to integrate LDAP as an authentication method with the Valkey charm 
within the Juju ecosystem.

> ```{caution}

Reviewer: Suggestion: Let's move this caution block to a more relevant place? Somewhere around first interaction with the self-signed-certificates charm.

Author: I've moved it to where it gets deployed.

In this guide, we use [self-signed certificates](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Self-signed_certificate) 

> provided by the [`self-signed-certificates` operator](https://github.com/canonical/self-signed-certificates-operator).

Reviewer: It's good that we have a warning like that. But linking to GitHub may be not the best way.

Suggestion:
The old way of doing that is to link to a particular page about certificates usage in Juju (X.509 certificates topic):
https://github.com/canonical/opensearch-operator/blob/2/edge/docs/how-to/tls-encryption.md?plain=1#L24 
But this page is being redirected to a completely different resource, still somewhat useful. So we can use the redirected address and more or less similar text.

Author: I've taken over that part, we also already had it in the TLS docs of Valkey, so it is more consistent now.

> **This is not recommended for a production environment.**

Reviewer: Suggestion: 
1. Make the warning block shorter.
2. Make the text explicit about what is not recommended for clarity.

Check the collection of [Charmhub operators](https://charmhub.io/?q=tls-certificates) that implement the 
`tls-certificate` interface.
```

## Prerequisites 

You will need:

> * A deployment of Charmed Valkey, either on VM or Kubernetes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following components are required before proceeding:

* Charmed Valkey deployed on either a VM or Kubernetes.
```

Author: updated

* A Kubernetes Juju controller to deploy the LDAP provider

> ## Deploy an LDAP server on Kubernetes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Deploy LDAP server charm
```

Author: updated

> If you run Charmed Valkey on a VM deployment, you will need a separate Juju controller with a K8s

Reviewer: Suggestion: Since it is a how-to guide, let's avoid using future tense and use imperative present tense.

For example:

```suggestion
If you run Charmed Valkey on a VM deployment, use a separate Juju controller with a K8s
```

Author: updated

model in order to deploy the [`glauth-k8s` charm](https://charmhub.io/glauth-k8s). We will then 
create a cross-controller relation to the Valkey VM model.

> With Charmed Valkey deployed on Kubernetes, you can simply deploy GLAuth alongside without a 

Reviewer: Suggestion: Avoid using "can", you can drop it to be more imperative.

```suggestion
With Charmed Valkey deployed on Kubernetes, deploy GLAuth alongside without a 
```

Author: updated

separate Juju model.

> Deploy `glauth-k8s`, `self-signed-certificates`, and `postgresql-k8s`:

Reviewer: Question: I assume we can't use glauth-k8s stable here? Are you sure we should use latest?

Author: No we can't, I've discovered a bug that they have fixed in `latest/edge` and not yet promoted to `stable`. Without that fix, the LDAP integration will not work with Valkey deployed on VM.

```shell
juju switch <vm_controller>:<model-name>
```

Consume the LDAP offers:

```shell
juju consume <k8s_controller>:admin/<k8s-model-name>.ldap
juju consume <k8s_controller>:admin/<k8s-model-name>.send-ca-cert
```

(define-roles)=
## Define roles and permissions

Charmed Valkey supports a role-based access control model to allow permissions based on LDAP groups.
To define the desired roles, configure `entity-permissions` through Data Integrator and configure 
the mapping of these roles to LDAP groups to Charmed Valkey.

### Set up Data Integrator

Deploy the Data Integrator charm in the same model as Charmed Valkey:

```shell
juju deploy data-integrator --channel latest/edge
```

The configuration of `entity-permissions` expects a list of role definitions in JSON syntax. Let's
assume we want to configure two roles, one with read and write permissions and one with read-only
permissions:

```json
[
    {
        "resource_name": "ldap_users_write",
        "resource_type": "acl",
        "privileges": ["+@read", "+@write", "~*"]
    },
    {
        "resource_name": "ldap_users_read",
        "resource_type": "acl",
        "privileges": ["+@read", "~*"]    
    }
]
```

> Configure these permissions to Data Integrator:

Reviewer: Suggestion: wording improvements.

```suggestion
Configure permissions for Data Integrator:
```

Author: updated

```shell
juju config data-integrator prefix-name="*" entity-permissions='[{"resource_name": "ldap_users_write", "resource_type": "acl", "privileges": ["read", "write", "~*"]}, {"resource_name": "ldap_users_read", "resource_type": "acl", "privileges": ["read", "~*"]}]'
```

Now integrate with Valkey to provide the role definition:

```shell
juju integrate valkey:valkey-client data-integrator:valkey
```

### Configure role mapping

After setting up a role-based access control model in Valkey, configure the mapping of LDAP groups
to your defined roles in Valkey:

```shell
juju config valkey ldap-map="<ldap_group_name>:ldap_users_write,<another_ldap_group>:ldap_users_read"
```

Due to a limitation in GLAuth, it might also be required to configure the attribute that contains 
the username in the LDAP directory:

```shell
juju config valkey ldap-search-dn-attribute="mail"
```

## Enable LDAP

> Now all required configuration is set up and LDAP can be enabled by integrating Valkey with GLAuth:

Reviewer: Suggestion: imperative wording.

```suggestion
After completing all required configuration, integrate Valkey with GLAuth to enable LDAP:
```

Author: updated

```shell
juju integrate valkey:ldap-ca-cert glauth-k8s:send-ca-cert
juju integrate valkey:ldap glauth-k8s:ldap
```

Wait for the deployment to settle and log in to Valkey with the username and password from LDAP.

> The permissions in Valkey are set up according to the defined roles and the configured role mapping.

Reviewer: Question: Can we do something simple to check/verify success?

Author: Not really anything else than logging in. I could add a short part about the login (similar to here: https://canonical-charmed-valkey.readthedocs-hosted.com/latest/tutorial/#access-the-database), or some explanation about what happens if something goes wrong. I've added that as a proposal, please let me know which you prefer.

Reviewer: Yes, I think it would be nice to have some simple procedure to verify that it all works now. As long as it is not too big and cumbersome.

Author: I've added a short cli login procedure for verification purposes.

## Synchronize LDAP users

Charmed Valkey adds all users from the configured LDAP groups to its ACL files. Over time, the group
assignments in LDAP might evolve: new users might be added to or existing users might be removed from
LDAP groups.

Synchronize the LDAP users in Valkey by running the `sync-ldap-users` action on the leader unit:

```shell
juju run valkey/leader sync-ldap-users
```

This will update the ACL files on all units.

## Disable LDAP

You can disable LDAP in Valkey by removing the relations with GLAuth:

```shell
juju remove-relation valkey:ldap-ca-cert glauth-k8s:send-ca-cert
juju remove-relation valkey:ldap glauth-k8s:ldap
```

> This removes all LDAP users that where previously added to Valkey's ACL files.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This removes all LDAP users that were previously added to Valkey's ACL files.  
```

Author: updated

```

Now integrate with Valkey to provide the role definition:

```shell
juju integrate valkey:valkey-client data-integrator:valkey
```

### Configure role mapping

After setting up a role-based access control model in Valkey, configure the mapping of LDAP groups
to your defined roles in Valkey:

```shell
juju config valkey ldap-map="<ldap_group_name>:ldap_users_write,<another_ldap_group>:ldap_users_read"
```

Due to a limitation in GLAuth, it might also be required to configure the attribute that contains 
the username in the LDAP directory:

```shell
juju config valkey ldap-search-dn-attribute="mail"
```

## Enable LDAP

After completing all required configuration, integrate Valkey with GLAuth to enable LDAP::

```shell
juju integrate valkey:ldap-ca-cert glauth-k8s:send-ca-cert
juju integrate valkey:ldap glauth-k8s:ldap
```

Wait for the deployment to settle and log in to Valkey with the username and password from LDAP.
The permissions in Valkey are set up according to the defined roles and the configured role mapping.

> 

Reviewer: Suggestion: Let's separate the check from the actions actually required to enable LDAP.

```suggestion

### Test LDAP authentication

```

Author: Good idea!

Get the endpoint for login from `juju status` and log in using `valkey-cli`:

```shell
valkey-cli -h <your-ip-address> -p 6379
```

Authenticate with your username and password from LDAP:

```shell

> <your-ip-address>:6379> AUTH <ldap username> <ldap password>

Reviewer: Suggestion: I know we are in this tool's CLI now, but we really should avoid adding prompts to our code blocks. Let's keep it copy-pastable.

```suggestion
AUTH <ldap username> <ldap password>
```

Author: updated

```

> Now perform a basic health check with this command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now perform a basic health check:
```

Author: updated

```shell

> <your-ip-addres>:6379> ping

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ping
```

Author: updated

```

You should receive this response from the Valkey server:

```text
PONG
```

If something goes wrong or a configuration is missing, Charmed Valkey will display a `blocked` 

> status with more information, for example: `LDAP: Missing config for 'ldap-map'`.

Reviewer: Suggestion: Why don't we move this paragraph right before we started testing?

Author: I've moved it

# How to manage LDAP

LDAP (Lightweight Directory Access Protocol) enables centralized authentication for Valkey, 
reducing the overhead of managing local credentials. LDAP support in Charmed Valkey also enables
role-based access control.

This guide goes over the steps to integrate LDAP as an authentication method with the Valkey charm 
within the Juju ecosystem.

## Prerequisites 

The following components are required before proceeding:

* Charmed Valkey deployed on either a VM or Kubernetes.
* A Kubernetes Juju controller to deploy the LDAP provider

## Deploy LDAP server charm

If you run Charmed Valkey on a VM deployment, use a separate Juju controller with a K8s

> model in order to deploy the [`glauth-k8s` charm](https://charmhub.io/glauth-k8s). We will then 

Reviewer 2: small nit: This is the only place `we` is used. We can unify the style as if we're talking to the user here as well

Author: Agree. Will take a note and fix it in another PR.
